# Data Modeling with Postgres

This repository contains my submission for Udacity's project **Data Modeling with Postgres** from the **Data Engineering Nanodegree**.

## Overview

Data modeling user activity data to create a database and ETL pipeline in Postgres for a music streaming app using **Python** and **SQL**.

## Libraries

```
psycopg2
```
```
os
```
```
glob
```
```
pandas
```
## Data

### Song Dataset

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

<pre>
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
</pre>

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

<pre>
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
</pre>

### Log Dataset

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

<pre>
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
</pre>

If you would like to look at the JSON data within log_data files, you will need to create a pandas dataframe to read the data. Remember to first import JSON and pandas libraries.

<pre>
df = pd.read_json(filepath, lines=True)
</pre>

For example, 
<pre>
df = pd.read_json('data/log_data/2018/11/2018-11-01-events.json', lines=True) would read the data file 2018-11-01-events.json.
</pre>


## Schema for Song Play Analysis

Using the song and log datasets, you'll need to create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

### Fact Table
songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

### Dimension Tables

**users** - users in the app

```
user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
```

**songs** - songs in music database

```
song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
```
**artists** - artists in music database
```
artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
```
**time** - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
```
start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday
```
## Project Template

To get started with the project, go to the workspace on the next page, where you'll find the project template files. You can work on your project and submit your work through this workspace. Alternatively, you can download the project template files from the Resources folder if you'd like to develop your project locally.

## the project workspace 

The project workplace includes five files (excluding readme):

```test.ipynb``` displays the first few rows of each table to let you check your database.

```create_tables.py``` drops and creates your tables. You run this file to reset your tables before each time you run your ETL scripts.

```etl.ipynb``` reads and processes a single file from song_data and log_data and loads the data into your tables. This notebook contains detailed instructions on the ETL process for each of the tables.

```etl.py``` reads and processes files from song_data and log_data and loads them into your tables. You can fill this out based on your work in the ETL notebook.

```sql_queries.py``` contains all your sql queries, and is imported into the last three files above.
